Hello friends
In this video let us discuss about the implementation of
adjacency Matrix
So an adjacency matrix for a graph with n
vertices isn't and n by n matrix and if the reason
it's from i to g we will mark matrix of IG
equal to one
Otherwise it is marked zero that is here we have
five vertices
So it's adjacency
matrix ADJ will be a five by five matrix
Now the recent edge from 0 to 1 So adj
of 01 will be equal to one
Now there is no edge from 1 to 0 so
adj of 10 will be equal to zero
Similarly there is an edge from 2 to 3
So adj of 23 equal to one and there
is no edge from 2 to 4
So adj of two four equal to zero
So that is an adjacency matrix and the graph
with just so is a directed graph
That is the edges are directed we can specifically say
the edge is from a to b not like saying the
recent edge between A and B so the edges will be directed
So let us first see the keys of a directed
graph say How to implement it first let us define
the number of vertices V as five
So we are dealing with a graph of five vertices
so what will be its adjacency matrix
It will be a five by five matrix
So declare a adjacency matrix as a two dimensional
array edge matrix of V V now the five by
five matrix is created now What we have to do
is whenever we add an edge we have to set
that particular cell as one that is let us add
an edge from 0 to 1
So what really should happen is the value at row
zero and column one should be set to one let us
call a function add edge which will do it
and pass the matrix edge matrix and the source and
destination vertices to the function add edge
So we have add edge of edge matrix comma zero comma
one it means edge from 0 to 1 should
be added in edge matrix
So control gets here and matrix is stored in arr
and zero invariable SRC and one invariable dest now set
array of source destination equal to one so array of
01 is set to one so the edges added from
0 to 1 so that all
It's very simple
Now let's add another edge from Vertex zero to Vertex
two
So call function add edge of edge matrix comma zero comma
two so control gets here and in a simple step
set value at row zero and column two as one
And we have array of source destination equal to
one so that's set the edges added
Now let us add another edge from zero to three
so call the function add edge by passing edge matrix zero and
three zero is stored in SRC and three is stored
and dest and we have arr of source dest equal
to one
So array of zero three is set to one that
is the edge from 0 to 3 is added in
the graph
Now let's add another edge from 1 to 3
So called the function add edge of edge matrix comma one
comma three so controlle gets here and array of one
three is set to one let us add another edge
from 1 to 4 so call the function add edge by passing
edge matrix
One and four
So control gets here and sets array of one four
21 So the edge from 1 to 4 is added
in the graph
Now let us add another edge from 2 to 3
So call a function add edge by passing edge matrix two and three
so two is stored in SRC and three is stored in
dest and we have array of 23 set to
one by the step
now let us
Add another
edge from 3 to 4
So call the function add edge by passing edge matrix three
and four
So control gets here and we have array of
source destination equal to one
So array of three four that is the value at
row three Column four set to one
So this is how we can add an edge in
a graph implemented as an adjacency matrix
Now let us printed so call a function print edge
matrix by passing adjacency matrix
So control gets here and the matrix is stored in
the parameter arr and we can print it simply as
we print any two dimensional array use nested for loop
and in each iteration of the outer loop each row
will be printed
See we have for I equal to 0 I less than V
I plus plus in first iteration I equal to zero and
inside we have for J equal to 0 J less than
V J plus plus
And in first iteration of this loop J
equal to 0
So now I equal to 0 and J
equal to 0 and we have the statement print arr of
I J that is arr of 00 which is zero
and it will be printed in the next iteration
J equal to One arr of 01 which is one
is printed in next iteration J equal to two so arr
of 02 which is one is printed in the next
iteration J equal
to three so arr of 03 which is one is
printed in next iteration J equal to four so arr of zero for
which is zero is printed in the next iteration J
equal to five and the condition J less than V
fails and control goes to the next line and the
first iteration of outer loop is now completed and we
got the first row printed
Similarly in the second iteration of the outer loop the
second row will be printed and in third iteration the
third row is printed in Fourth Iteration
The fourth row is printed in fifth iteration
The fifth row is printed and in sixth iteration I
will be equal to five
So the condition I less than V fails and control comes
out of the for loop
So this is how we can print the adjacency
matrix
So this is how we can simply implement a graph
as an adjacency matrix and add at just to
it
We also learned how to print and adjacency matrix
Now how can we check Whether an edge exist or
not in a graph it is also very simple
See we have the adjacency matrix here
We want to know if the recent edge from 1
to 3 So just go to Row one and column
three
And if the value here is one then recent edge
if it zero then there is no edge so let us see
how to implement it We have a function has edge
check it and we will pass a Matrix
The source vertex and destination vertex to this function
we want to check if there is an edge from
1 to 3 so pass the values
So SRC equal to one and dest equal to three
Now simply check If arr of SRC dest equal to
one and it is
So an edge access from 1 to 3 So returned
one
And if it was not one then there is no edge
So we should have returned
Zero now let us check if there is an edge from
2 to 4
So SRC equal to 2 and Dest equal to 4 So check
If arr of source dest equal to one and it
is not it is equal to zero So there is
no edge from src to dest so return zero So
that is how we can insert a dest and check
If an edge access between two vertices now
Let us see how to remove an edge from a
graph
For that we have a function Remove edge Here
also we will pass the adjacency matrix source vertex
and destination vertex to the function and simply We
can remove the edge by making arr of SRC dest
equal to zero That is if that particular cell equal
to one then the there is an edge so we can make
it zero to remove that edge so let us remove the edge
from vertex zero to vertex three
So what we have to do is we have to
go to row zero and column three and make that
value zero
So SRC equal to 0 and dest equal to 3 here now simply
set Arr of SRC dest that's arr of zero three
equal to zero and that's all the edge is removed now
Now let us remove the edge from vertex 2 to
vertex
3 So SRC equal to 2 and dest equal to three
Now simply set arr of 23 equal to zero that
is value at Row two and column three equal to
zero and the edge is removed
So this is how we can remove any edge from
a graph
So we learned how to implement a graph using adjacency
matrix and we learned how to add edge
how to print adjacency Matrix how to check
whether edge exist or Not and also how to
remove an edge
But all these were about directed graph
Now let us discuss about the implementation of undirected graphs
see an example of undirected graph
You see the edges
are undirected that is in directed graphs the edges were
directed
We could say the edge is from 0 to 1
or from 1 to 0 specifically but here it is
not possible
The edge is just between zero and one
It could be from 0 to 1 or from 1
to 0
That is the difference between directed and undirected graphs
So let us see the implementation
The implementation is not much different
The thing is when we add an edge between zero
and one we're actually adding two edges from 0 to
1 and also from 1 to 0
So when they add an edge we have to add
an additional edge in the opposite direction also
So when we add an edge from 1 to 3
we have to add an edge from 3 to 1
also and if we add an edge from 3 to
2 we have to add innit from 2 to 3
Also just like that
So let us add an edge from 0 to 1
So in add edge function set array of SRC dest
equal to one and along with that set array of
dest SRC equal to one
So the value at row zero column one is set
and also value at Row one and column zero is
also set now let us add another edge between two and three
So set arr of 23 equal to one
So Edge from two to three is added now set
arr of three to equal to one
So Edge from 3 to 2 is also added
So this is how we can implement a graph using
adjacency matrix
And in the next video we will discuss how a
graph can be implemented using adjacency List